Add blog post: "Where Does the Value Live?" (#34)
mattfelten/mattfelten.com: src/content/posts/2026-02-12-design-process.md

---
title: Where Does the Value Live?
date: 2026-02-12
---

> I learned the design process the way most of us did. Research, define, ideate, prototype, test, iterate. It's a good framework. It taught me to slow down, to ask questions before jumping to solutions, to listen to people who aren't me. Process gave me rigor. It gave me empathy. I owe a lot to it.

Author: ```suggestion
I learned the design process the way most of us did. Research, define, ideate, prototype, test, iterate. It's a good framework. It taught me to slow down, to ask questions before jumping to solutions, to listen to people who aren't me. Process gave me rigor. It strengthened my empathy. It taught me to ask the right questions.
```

> But the cost of trying ideas has dropped dramatically. Better tools, component libraries, mature frameworks, AI. When making is cheap, you can explore more. I went from _narrow down, then build_ to _build many, then narrow down._

Author: ```suggestion
But the cost of trying ideas has dropped dramatically. Better tools, design systems, mature frameworks, AI. When making is cheap, you can explore more, quicker. My process has shifted from _narrow down, then build_ to _build many, then narrow down._
```

I had a project recently. A third-party integration, fast-paced partnership, needed to ship quickly.

> 1. Started with team brainstorming. I took those rough notes and shaped them into different directions.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Started with team brainstorming. I took those rough notes and shaped them into different possible directions.
```

> 2. Built seven working React prototypes in two days. Not mockups. Functional code, running in the app. They ranged from the smallest change possible to a full customer dashboard redesign.

Author: ```suggestion
2. Built seven working prototypes in two days. Not mockups. Functional React code running in the app. They ranged from the smallest change possible to a full feature redesigns.
```

3. Clicked through each prototype, felt which ones were getting closer, and narrowed down to the strongest. Quick conversations with teammates to build consensus.

> 4. A half-day of craft bouncing between Figma and code. The bigger the feature, the faster it is to prototype in code, but specific UI elements are still faster to nail down in Figma. The winning prototype evolved into shipped code. Reworked, polished, tested for accessibility and responsiveness.

Author: ```suggestion
4. A half-day of craft, bouncing between Figma and code. The bigger the feature, the faster it is to prototype in code, but specific UI elements are still faster to nail down in Figma. The winning prototype turned into shipped code. Reworked, polished, tested for accessibility and responsiveness.
```

Concept to production, under a week.

> I explored a wide range of ideas deliberately. Small incremental additions slowly degrade a UI without anyone noticing. One more button here, one more panel there. Sometimes the right answer really is the smallest change. Sometimes the whole thing needs rethinking. You don't know until you see both sides of the spectrum.

Author: ```suggestion
I explored a wide range of ideas deliberately. Small incremental additions slowly degrade a UI without anyone noticing. One more button here, one more panel there. Sometimes the right answer really is the smallest change. Sometimes the whole thing needs rethinking. Sometimes the best solution is somewhere in between. You don't know until you see the full spectrum.
```

> When you can prototype that fast, the bottleneck isn't execution. It's judgment. Knowing which direction to ship. That's the part no process diagram can replace.

Author: "That's the part no process diagram can replace." I think this needs more nuance. I think process is there to make judgement less subjective. A designer spends their career improving their taste, their empathy, their level of quality. And then an overly-strict process comes in and says all that knowledge doesn't matter and that testing and users are the final decision makers. That's a bit of an exaggeration but I don't agree with it. The same way that design reviews and feedback are subjective. The designer is the one taking feedback, analyzing it, and deciding what to take and what to leave.

My process isn't a diamond diagram. It's a set of values.

- Stay close to the materials. The code, the users, the data.

> - Do enough research to unlock making. Keep researching as you go.

Author: Let's brainstorm some other versions of this. I liked it before these changes. This one isn't quite solid yet.

date: 2026-02-12
---

I learned the design process the way most of us did. Research, define, ideate, prototype, test, iterate. It's a good framework. It taught me to slow down, to ask questions before jumping to solutions, to listen to people who aren't me. Process gave me rigor. It strengthened my empathy. It taught me to ask the right questions.

But the cost of trying ideas has dropped dramatically. Better tools, design systems, mature frameworks, AI. When making is cheap, you can explore more, quicker. My process has shifted from _narrow down, then build_ to _build many, then narrow down._

Currently, I'm the only designer on a small software team. Nine engineers, a product manager, and me. I spent the last decade in design management and took this role to get back to making things.

I had a project recently. A third-party integration, a fast-paced partnership. We needed to ship quickly.

1. Started with team brainstorming. I took those rough notes and shaped them into different possible directions.
2. Built working prototypes in two days. Not mockups. Rough but functional React code running in the app. They ranged from the smallest change possible to a full feature redesign.

> 3. I started with three directions, and each one surfaced new variations as I built it. The building was the ideation. I killed options for being too buried, too ambitious for the timeline, or too clever. Narrowed to the strongest and confirmed with the team.

Author: ```suggestion
1. I started by brainstorming with the team. I took those rough notes and shaped them into different possible directions.
2. Over the next couple of days I built working prototypes. Not mockups. Rough but functional React code running in the app. They ranged from the smallest change possible to a full feature redesign.
3. I started with three directions, and each one had me explore more variations as I built it. The building was the ideation. I killed options for being too buried, too ambitious for the timeline, or too clever. Narrowed to the strongest and confirmed with the team.
```

> 4. A half-day of craft, bouncing between Figma and code. The bigger the feature, the faster it is to prototype in code, but specific UI elements are still faster to nail down in Figma. The winning prototype turned into shipped code. Reworked, polished, tested for accessibility and responsiveness.

Author: ```suggestion
4. A half-day of refining and polish, bouncing between Figma and code. I'm finding that the bigger the feature, the faster it is to prototype in code, but specific UI elements and interactions are still faster to nail down in Figma first. The winning prototype turned into shipped code. Reworked, polished, tested for accessibility and responsiveness.
```
